---
layout: single
title:  "Appendix D: How the Brain Learns"
categories: guides
toc: true
sidebar:
  nav: "guide"
---


The following appendix is a set of discussions on how learning happens
in our minds, applied to language learning specifically. While I
reference language learning throughout, the sources for this info come
from elsewhere and can be applied more generally.

# A growth mindset


A [growth
mindset](https://www.brainpickings.org/2014/01/29/carol-dweck-mindset/)
is the belief that you are capable of improving. Don’t let your beliefs
about your own ability place limits on what you can achieve. Believing
that you lack certain talents or will never reach a certain level will
make it so. While talent provides a nice boost, anybody who got good at
anything got there through thousands of hours of practice that you don’t
see. Achieving the same will take time and practice.

# Be curious


The best way to learn something is when there is clear relevance and
usefulness to you. The mere act of “wanting” to know something seems to
help. If you want to cultivate this effect, approach unfamiliar words
and forms with a sense of curiosity. Prime your mind by genuinely trying
to figure out how a word or form affects the meaning of the sentence
before you look it up. It also helps if you encounter words multiple
times, giving the word a sense of familiarity and importance.

# Learning is a subconscious process


It is primarily subconscious processes that mark something as important
and enable us to remember something. Learning something that has no
obvious relevance to your life, you haven’t needed to use, and has no
relation to anything else you know can be hard. First learning something
completely new constitutes a mental “hurdle”. That is, learning
basically requires pure memorisation. This type of memorisation is very,
very difficult to do relative to other methods. There is a high degree
of mental “resistance”—meaning it seems hard to get it to stick in your
memory.

There are several ways to can reduce this mental hurdle:

-   **Context**—Use phrases and content to link words to others, showing
    you how they are used in context

-   **Logical connections**—Words often share roots or affixes in common
    with other words you know which you can use as prompt to help you
    remember

-   **Mnemonics**—Read the for useful techniques to create other logical
    connections

-   **Personal connection**—Try to create a connection to the word so
    that it becomes personally meaningful to you

-   **Curiosity**—Stay curious and interested in the words and forms you
    encounter

# Top-down and bottom-up processing


When trying to understand something, the human brain uses two broad
processes: top-down and bottom-up.

**Top-down processing** involves using context to make deductions about
what some content is about. **Bottom-up processing** involves
understanding the pieces to build up to a coherent whole. Using both
helps you learn new words and constructions from context.

For example: while watching a video you encounter a new word. You might
note that the speaker appears to be indicating an apple in their hand.
In this case, top-down processing involves picking up that the word
means “apple” naturally.

Bottom-up processing is any word or form you already know that helps you
understand the sentence. Pausing a video to try to recall the function
of a form you just heard is a good example of bottom-up processing being
practised and applied to learn effectively.

When engaging with content, both processes work in tandem to help you
apprehend meaning in real time. Knowing this lets you take advantage of
it. Before you start something, make sure you understand the context and
have formed expectations surrounding what the resource is going to show
you. One common method of doing this is beginning a text by skim reading
or starting a TV episode with a plot summary.

# Chunks


Which ordering of letters do you think is easier to memorise: “orhezo
esn rinyg bivt”, or “snoozing by the river”? You would probably find the
latter much easier to remember, though both contain the exact same
letters. This is because you are already familiar with the constituent
parts. You’ve already memorised the correct spelling of each word and
their order fits comfortably in the patterns of language you find
intuitive (it is grammatical).

This idea of already-learned aspects of language is a concept we will
refer to as **chunks**. The concept was brought into the public
consciousness by Barbara Oakley, who posted a good overview of the idea
[here](https://www.quora.com/What-are-the-most-effective-learning-techniques-you-have-experienced-so-far/answer/Barbara-Oakley).
Known aspects of language constitute chunks which don’t require effort
for you to comprehend or use. These known chunks are an aide that will
help teach you how the new word or piece of grammar is used.

It is far easier to learn something new when other aspects you are
presented with at the same time are already easily understandable. For
example, learning the meaning and usage of a new word in an example
sentence will be much easier if you already know all the other words,
just like how it is much easier to remember all those letters once they
are organised into words. Grammar will be easier to memorise if one
concept is presented to you using words you already know. The additional
context provided by known chunks will assist you in understanding the
new part and you will learn faster overall.

Once you learn something, it becomes a new chunk to help provide context
for learning new concepts.

Building new chunks is difficult and takes focused effort. The core
insight of this idea is that **it is almost impossible to learn a lot of
new chunks of language at once**. Learning using a text or example
sentences chock full of new grammatical constructions and words might
seem like a really efficient way of learning, but there will be no
familiar connections or context to aid understanding, and your learning
will actually be slower. Recollection will be particularly hard, akin to
recalling random letters in order. Focusing on learning a single aspect
at a time allows you to build new chunks easily while minimising the
chance of forgetting.

This principle does not mean “don’t try to learn quickly”. It means that
when you learn a new word or grammatical construction, you will learn it
much faster if it is presented to you in the context of other chunks of
language that are already familiar to you. If you are learning something
difficult, learn that difficult thing in context of already known things
and rely on that context and knowledge to help you learn. The texts you
use to learn should already be mostly comprehensible, and learning words
or grammar is best done with understandable context, either in text or
with example sentences for your flashcards.

# Difficulty + successful recall


When you encounter a something recently learned, the general stages are
as follows:

1.  **Confusion/uncertainty**—The learner finds something unclear when
    they first encounter it in their content.

2.  **Mental effort**—Mental effort is expended trying to recall a word
    or concept to use it. This is where the most powerful learning
    happens.

3.  **Insight**—The mental effort pays off, and the learner successfully
    grasps meaning using their new knowledge.

4.  **Repetition**—Each time the new word or concept is encountered it
    becomes easier.

Your brain learns optimally when you encounter something, **expend
mental effort**, and eventually succeed. To ensure your mental effort
results in learning, aim for just the right amount of difficulty—not too
difficult that something presents an insurmountable barrier, but not so
easy that you don’t learn anything new. This is the principle .

When something is too difficult, a lack of context and meaningful
connections create a barrier that results in a lot of tiring mental
effort with relatively little payoff. When something is too easy, there
is no mental challenge, and you don’t learn anything. When a resource is
mostly comprehensible, all the known words and forms surrounding
something new provides useful context that reduces the barrier to
understanding and enables optimal learning.

Avoid doing activities that are too much of a struggle until you are
able to do slightly easier ones. If you constantly find yourself
struggling without understanding, you need to find an easier activity.

Often you will struggle to recall the meaning of a word or form and will
be forced to look it up. This is perfectly natural and very common.
While re-looking things up helps learning, it is not optimal. Try to
find ways to prompt yourself to remember the answer.

# Active recall


[Active recall](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Active_recall) is the
active use of memory during the learning process. It requires focused
attention on recalling and using information to improve your language
skill. This can be contrasted with passive learning, where you allow
knowledge to come to you in a passive way without actively straining to
decode meaning or recall a concept. For example, relaxing and watching a
TV show or reading over your study notes.

While passive activities such as simply watching a show are generally
much more enjoyable and easier to do in large amounts, active recall is
more efficient in terms of progress per hour spent. Active learning by
using your content for focused study will let you gain new knowledge
faster. At the same time, learning a language takes enormous amounts of
input and there is no way to realistically expose yourself to all the
forms and words you need without large amounts of passive learning.

Be sure you are doing both types of learning. You may find it better to
use more difficult resources for active learning and easier ones for
passive learning.

# Habit


We are creatures of habit. One of the keys to maintaining your routine
is **habit**. Build a habit of studying at a regular time each day. The
best time is usually first thing in the morning, while you are still
fresh and probably don’t have anything else scheduled. With a good
habit, your automatic process should be to begin studying without you
having to think about it. If you have to ask yourself “should I study or
should I do something else?”, it takes mental effort to force yourself
to study that will wear you down over time. Instead, your default should
be that time is dedicated to study. If you want to use that time for
something else, you need to find valid and specific reason.

It helps a lot if your interaction with the language is consistent. Try
not to take long breaks from learning. Do at least a little bit every
day. Too tired? Just do five minutes. Those five minutes now keep you in
the habit of doing something every day and keep the language active in
your mind.

**Another key to maintaining your habit and routine is discipline**.
Discipline is not an inherent trait, but a set of habits and mental
tools that help one start projects and stay on-task. Not every day will
you find it easy to keep your habit. If this is you, you may need to
find ways to force yourself to at least begin studying. Try promising
yourself to simply start with the intention of only doing five minutes.
Usually you will find it easier to continue once you have already
started.

[Prev](\assets\docs\languageguide\Appendixc\){: .btn .btn--primary .btn--x-large} | [Next](\assets\docs\languageguide\Appendixe\){: .btn .btn--primary .btn--x-large}
