---
layout: single
title:  "Appendix C: Further Advice on Learning Vocabulary"
categories: guides
toc: true
sidebar:
  nav: "guide"
---

Learning words is such a large topic that it doesn’t easily fit in a
beginner-oriented guide. To help anyone interested, I have placed a
some information here.

## Multi-word phrases


Many words have meanings that are closely tied to the meaning of words
next to them, and the meaning of the whole may have little relation to
their meaning when taken in isolation. Some examples in English include
*of course*, *come what may*, *big cheese*, or *early bird*. Think of
these as discrete bits of vocabulary to be learned together. Constituent
words should be thought of as aides to help you form associations. It is
important to also learn these kinds of phrases in your study. Often this
is done with flashcards.

## Focus on words that don’t directly translate

Most words in your target language will have a relatively
straightforward equivalent, particularly if you are learning a language
that is closely related to English. For the most part, the words *dog*,
*shoot*, and *tree* all have a simple translation you can memorise.
However, there will always be words that don’t quite fit with how you
think of them in English. Among these will be words that have a
significantly expanded range of uses compared to the direct English
translation. It is important to learn the most common of these. Take,
for example, the Spanish word *poner* (*put* in English). *Poner* is
used in a variety of phrases where a native English speaker might not
expect, such as *ponerse de pie*, which simply means *stand up*.

Consciously learning the many different meanings of these words is a
good way of avoiding common learner mistakes and making your speech
sound more natural. In this case, you’d need to put focused effort into
the many definitions of *poner* as if it were several words rather than
one. This will be greatly helped by using example sentences in your
flashcards.

On the other hand, there are also common English words with many
meanings where your target language may have several words instead.
These are much harder to spot. The best you can do is watch for phrases
where you think *I’d have translated that differently*.

## Logical connections help you learn words


Words are often composed of smaller root words and particles that can
help you understand their meaning. Take the English word *destruction*.
This contains the prefix *de-*, the noun *structure*, and the suffix
*-tion*. The meaning of this word might be easy to guess as a native,
but it wouldn’t be so easy if you weren’t familiar with its parts. Being
familiar with the constituent parts of a word makes learning its meaning
easier.

Many words are derived from others and form a grouping of related words.
For example, understanding the English root *mech-* can help you
remember or derive the meaning of many words, such as *mechanic*,
*mechanical*, and *mechanised*. You can use this type of association to
link known words to similar-sounding known ones. Some root words have
derivations that may not be immediately obvious. For example, the root
*-spir-* is the link between the words *inspire*, *respire*, and
*spirit*. The associations you use to help you remember words may be
more abstract because of this.

Take advantage of these connections by trying to spot them where
possible. You should also try to avoid learning large words if you don’t
know anything about their constituents.

You can also spot similarities between words in your target and native
languages. For example, the English word *citizen* and French word
*citoyen*.

[Prev](\assets\docs\languageguide\Appendixb\){: .btn .btn--primary .btn--x-large} | [Next](\assets\docs\languageguide\Appendixd\){: .btn .btn--primary .btn--x-large}
