---
layout: single
title:  "Appendix H: Choosing a Language"
categories: guides
toc: true
sidebar:
  nav: "guide"
---

The first thing you need to do is consider your goals and motivations.
Those factors that are most important to you are going to be the things
that ensure you retain the long-term motivation required to learn a
language. People choose a language for a multitude of reasons, here are
some you might consider:

-   **Personal interest**—Personal interest means you find the language
    inherently interesting and want to learn it for the joy of engaging
    with it. Some people learn languages because they think the grammar
    is cool, the language sounds beautiful, or they may simply like the
    culture, food, or music. Personal interest is generally a very
    powerful motivation that can persist for a lifetime.

-   **Work**—Knowing a language can create job opportunities and improve
    the look of a CV. Generally, the languages chosen are widely spoken
    or are the language of a country that your own frequently trades
    with. While it’s true more jobs benefit from fluency in Chinese,
    French or Spanish, other languages are still useful in a globalised
    world.

-   **Utility**—Utility means how useful the language will be to you
    personally. The languages with the most utility are typically those
    that are spoken where you live. Utility also comes from learning the
    languages of places where you would like to live or visit. Because
    many learners learn to communicate, utility is often a very
    motivating factor.

-   **Practicality**—This means availability of resources. If your
    target language is relatively obscure, resources in your native
    language may not be easily accessible. Difficulty finding resources
    or interesting content can severely hurt your motivation and
    interest, so learners who learn such languages are typically more
    motivated by other factors. Having family or close friends around
    that speak the language can mitigate the resource problem. Learners
    of more uncommon languages often use another more popular language
    as a bridge. For example, if you would like to learn Catalan, it
    will be helpful to learn Spanish first so you can use more
    resources.

-   **Family**—This means relatives you wish to communicate with better
    or a family heritage language. If you want to use members of your
    family to practise with, it is a good idea to make sure they are
    willing to help first. Talking with a complete beginner is rarely an
    interesting task for the native speaker, and as a learner you will
    only become engaging to talk to once you are at least at an
    intermediate level.

-   **Ease**—Languages that are more similar to ones you already know
    are significantly faster to learn. If you want to get to a
    communicative level faster, learning a similar language is better.
    If your only language is English, then the fastest languages to
    learn are Spanish, Swedish, Norwegian, French, Dutch, Portuguese,
    and Italian. If the target language uses many different sounds, has
    little common vocabulary, or has a radically different grammar, you
    must be willing to invest more time into it. For a quick idea, check
    the [FSI ranking](https://www.atlasandboots.com/foreign-service-institute-language-difficulty/),
    which serves as a rough approximation for someone who is dedicated
    but speaks only English. You can see that the hardest languages take
    over three times as long to reach a certain level as the easiest
    ones. While ease matters, in practice, people learning “harder”
    languages out of personal interest tend to be more successful than
    those who merely want to learn a language and simply pick the
    easiest. This is because the former has more motivation. Rather than
    thinking of difficulty, it is better to think in terms of the number
    of hours with the language it might take to reach a certain level.
    This is because languages you are bored by will be hard for you to
    stick with. You won’t enjoy the necessary hours of exposure. On the
    other hand, learning a language you love can be a lot of fun, even
    if it takes a bit longer.

The most important of these six categories is probably that of
**personal interest**. Whatever language you really want to learn the
most is the one you should probably choose. At the end of the day, you
choose your own life priorities. What you prioritise needs to extend
from what makes you happy. While the other five criteria can make you
happy, they only do so indirectly. The consequences of learning an easy
language or a language useful for your career are what make you happy.
For languages you rank highly in personal interest, engaging with the
language itself will be sufficient to give you fulfilment. This
fulfilment will be necessary to spend the hundreds, eventually
thousands, of hours you are going to spend with your chosen language.

Consider how important each of these categories of reasons are important
to you and how the languages you are considering align which each of
these. If you need to, write it down. By the end of this exercise, you
should have a better idea which language you prefer.

# Motivation


One of the biggest factors that determine your success is if you stick
with the language you choose. You are unlikely to learn a language you
have no motivation to continue with. Consider if your reasons for
learning are enough to keep you motivated. If not, you need to find a
reason that will.

If there is some factor on your list that is important but you don’t
feel it will motivate you to sit down and study, you need to consider
why you feel that it’s important to consider in the first place. It may
not be truly important to you.

**Key tip: Spend some time trying them out**
\
If you’re still undecided, I advise you spend a bit of time listening to
and potentially even studying each. You could even spend some time
learning about the languages as they relate to your priorities, such as
culture, its usefulness in work, or what the difficult aspects might be.
Any amount of time learning a language is useful for future languages
because it helps you understand how language can work, and you will
start to see similarities that make learning new concepts much easier.
{: .notice--danger}


[Prev](\assets\docs\languageguide\Appendixf\){: .btn .btn--primary .btn--x-large}
