---
layout: single
title:  "Before You Start"
categories: guides
toc: true
sidebar:
  nav: "guide"
---

This section aims to outline your journey ahead, starting with building a goal and then moving to how you progress.

# How long will it take?

The first thing to note is this: there is no perfect level. There are
only milestones that you set according to your goals. Have a level in
mind you want to reach; how long it takes then depends mainly on two key
factors:

1.  Approximately how many hours are required to reach your desired
    level

2.  How much time you can spend every day

Beginners often underestimate the amount of time it takes to learn a
language. How much time you can spend during the day is the primary
indicator of how achievable your goal is.

If you want a good ballpark estimate of how much time you need, you can
use the [United States Foreign Service Institute’s Language Difficulty
Ranking](https://www.state.gov/foreign-language-training/), which lists
the approximate class hours required to reach a competent level. For an
easier language like Spanish or French, most people take around 1–2
years to reach a good level. If you studied 10 hours solidly per day,
every day, you could potentially reach the same level in just over two
months. If you think you can’t reach your desired goals given the time
available, you need to either make time or adjust your goal’s timing.

# Set a goal

This guide assumes you have already chosen a language. If you haven’t,
read the guide in the appendix.

To learn a language, you should first set yourself a goal or set of
goals. Spend some time properly considering what motivates you to learn
your language and the situations you want to use it in. Write your goals
down somewhere.

The best goals are [SMART
goals](https://www.mindtools.com/pages/article/smart-goals.htm). That
is, they are Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant, and Time-bound.

**Specific**—Goals need to be something you can hold yourself
accountable to. Don’t make your goal too vague (e.g. “fluency”).

**Measurable**—Language progress can be hard to measure, but there
should be some degree of visible progress towards your goal.

**Achievable**–Don’t aim too high. You can’t be fluent in a year without
working at it like a full-time job.

**Relevant**—Make your goal depend on what you want out of your
language. Use to help you clarify your thinking.

**Time-bound**—Picking a point in time discourages you from slacking off
and letting progress lapse.

If you like, you can have smaller, short-term goals. These can help you
measure your progress and track other important milestones such as
vocabulary.

Don’t be afraid to revise any of your goals. If you’re going at it for
the first time, it can be hard to know how long it will take or if the
goal you choose is really what will motivate you in the future.

# How you progress

One of the best-kept secrets in language learning is how surprisingly
doable it is to reach an intermediate level. The fastest progress will
be made just beyond the very beginning stage. Every new bit of grammar
and vocabulary will be very common in your language, and this will
result in a noticeable improvement. After you hit the intermediate
level, however, noticeable progress appears to slow down. This results
in your progress feeling something like the graph below:

![png](/assets/docs/languageguide/progress2.png)

The good news is you can be conversational in a surprisingly quick
amount of time. Once you have the basics of phonology and grammar down
and know around 2,000 words, you will probably be able to make it
through a conversation with an accommodating native speaker. From there,
a bit more practice conversing to build more comfort with the language
and you can call yourself conversational. This is one of the most
rewarding parts of language learning.

Conversely, progress beyond the early intermediate stages will feel
slower by comparison. Every new word or form you learn will be much more
rare. Becoming fluent means becoming familiar with an ocean of unknown
words, nuance, idioms, and rare grammar. Reaching high levels of aural
comprehension and pronunciation will take a similarly long time. While
you might not need all these forms, idioms, and words to get by, they
are part of what comprises native-level ability.

Not every learner chooses to progress to an advanced level. In fact,
most stop somewhere around the intermediate level, with their exact
level usually determined by their goals. There is nothing wrong with
this. Learning a language requires trade-offs, and for many people the
extra time reaching an advanced level isn’t worth the effort.

# You are better at language learning than you think

Before we move on to what you will learn, I thought it would be useful
to quickly dispel some myths surrounding language learning. If you are
already feeling confident and motivated, you can skip this section.

First, **you don’t need to be highly intelligent or have a special
talent to learn a language**. Everybody learns at least one without too
much trouble. The technique for learning your second language is not
wildly different to your first. They key is that a lot is learned when
you give yourself time.

Second, **language learning is not as hard as it seems**. While many
people recall struggling to learn a language in school, this is more the
fault of the school’s curriculum.[^2] By using content to let the
language come to you, the process of learning will seem far less
effortful.

[^2]: For more information, see [What’s wrong with how schools teach languages?](\assets\docs\languageguide\appendixe\#whats-wrong-with-how-schools-teach-languages)

Finally, remember that **it’s natural to forget things a lot**. For many
people this is a frustrating experience that can cause them to think
they’re not good enough. This is not true. Learning is not instant and
every language learner forgets a lot. There is simply too much to learn
to expect you will remember all of it. The best way to move past this is
to accept you will forget and seek ways to prompt yourself to remember
without blaming or criticising yourself.

# Your mileage may vary

There is a lot of room for individual preference when it comes to what
works in language learning. Recognising this, I have tried to keep this
guide as open as possible by at least making you aware of the full range
of possibilities available to you. At the same time, the purpose of a
guide is to give you best practice without too much uncertainty. This
means at I have to give recommendations based on what works for most
people. If I recommend something, that is because I think it’s a good
idea for at least 95% of learners.

Everyone is different, and you may find something I recommend doesn’t
quite work for you. Remember: you are in control of your learning. If
you find something effective, you should continue to do it without
worrying over if other people recommend it or not. You’ll notice me
repeat this point throughout the guide.

That said, if you’re new, it’s not always easy to tell what is working
well. Until you’re a more experienced language learner, I advise you
don’t stray too far from the beaten path.

# What you will learn

Languages consist of two core components:

1.  **Grammar**

2.  **Vocabulary**

The language is expressed through any of the four skills:

1.  **Reading**—This is the main source of input for most language
    learners

2.  **Writing**—This skill generally comes with reading, but effective
    writing often requires learning spelling or stroke order

3.  **Listening**—This involves learning the language’s sound system,
    including vowels, consonants, and tones

4.  **Speaking**—This mostly involves learning to produce the language’s
    sound system yourself

The skills of reading and listening together are called **input** (or
content). The skills of writing and speaking are called **output**.

Languages are much more than the sum of their parts. For example, simply
knowing words and grammar rules won’t tell you which words tend to go
together, nor will it help you understand idioms. In addition, languages
are interwoven with their culture, and may frequently express concepts
that are unfamiliar to you. All of these are aspects of your language
you will encounter in your learning.

Once you start the intermediate stages you will have:

-   Basic grammar knowledge—Basic verb and noun forms, a good
    understanding of the general structure and logic of the language

-   A functional vocabulary—approximately 1,000–2,000 words, enough to
    be understood in basic conversations

-   The basics of the four key skills—enough to function in whatever
    context you are learning for

To get there, you need the three core resources. This is what we will look at in the next chapter.

 [Prev](\_pages\languageguide){: .btn .btn--primary .btn--x-large} | [Next](\assets\docs\languageguide\resources\){: .btn .btn--primary .btn--x-large}
