---
layout: single
title:  "Final Chapter"
categories: guides
toc: true
sidebar:
  nav: "guide"
---

# Summary


Here are the key ideas that underpin your learning:

1.  Work towards your goals

2.  Spend as much time as you can with your language

3.  Use the language in order to learn it

4.  Trust the process

Here are some key takeouts from your method:

**Progress through your course.** This will structure your learning.
Make sure you follow others’ recommendations but prioritise what you
enjoy using. Do not rely on your course to make you learn. You will
learn once you use the new words and forms you encounter in your course
by drilling and seeing them in your input.

**Drill and reinforce your knowledge.** This allows you to develop
aspects of your language you might be neglecting.

**Use flashcards to drill grammar and vocabulary**. Words are the
biggest barrier to comprehension, so focus on them if you want to
understand more. Using sentences is ideal. Learn to make your own
flashcards and add in words you encounter in your course and input.

**Drill using content**. This lets you learn any aspect of your language
in a way that lets you see it in use.

**Practise your language** to integrate everything you have learned
together.

**Listen and read as much as you can using content that is interesting
and comprehensible.** YouTube, Google, and language-specific communities
are your best shot at finding good content. Reading a book is a great
way to get input for learners of all levels.

**Speak and write to help solidify your understanding**. Find a
conversation partner and start speaking when you feel comfortable.

The latter parts will have given you lots more activities to try and
principles to integrate into your learning. Choose what you study based
on your goals and weaknesses. You can choose activities that are
meaning-focused, language-focused, or fluency-focused. Do a range of
study activities to get some variety.

Practise then drill. Practice will help you combine your skills together
and identify weaknesses. Drill will help you focus on these weaknesses
to improve your performance.

Mistakes are a common feature of language learning. Avoid building
fossilised mistakes and errors by using the language in context and
getting feedback on your output.

# Conclusion


Congratulations on making it to the end! You should now be in a
comfortable position to learn a language all on your own. Having read it
all once, the full guide is unlikely to stick in your mind, so be sure
to save this guide somewhere and come back at a later date once you feel
your study stagnating or you need some fresh ideas. There will probably
be something here to help.

Next you will find a large set of appendices that provide more guidance
on using flashcards, studying grammar and vocabulary, using content, and
more. Be sure to check it out if you’d like some more ideas.

If you have gotten here by reading the whole thing, please take a moment
to [send me an email](mailto:sajforbes@hotmail.com) with any thoughts,
feedback or error corrections you may have, no matter how small. I am
always trying to improve and your input is greatly appreciated.

Thank you for reading!

 [Prev](\assets\docs\languageguide\mistakes\){: .btn .btn--primary .btn--x-large} | [Next](\assets\docs\languageguide\Appendixa\){: .btn .btn--primary .btn--x-large}
