---
layout: single
title:  "Mistakes"
categories: guides
toc: true
sidebar:
  nav: "guide"
---

Earlier I discussed the need to let go of the fear of making mistakes so
that you can practise more effectively, and this remains true. However,
there are ways to learn faster and avoid making mistakes.

First, we need to mark an important distinction between mistakes and
errors.

**Mistakes** are accidental. The learner knows they are wrong. For
example, you might be taught to use the subjunctive in Spanish but will
often forget to use it when you are speaking or writing. You would
recognise the mistake if you had a chance to check your own output
carefully.

**Errors** are incorrect use of the language caused by a learner’s lack
of knowledge. This could be failing to use the subjunctive because you
are not aware it should be used in a certain context. In this case, you
would still fail to correct yourself after checking your output.

Mistakes are a natural part of speaking and become less common over time
with practice. Even native speakers occasionally make mistakes. Errors,
on the other hand, tend to stay around much longer and are more
difficult to fix. For that reason, it is errors rather than mistakes
that we should be focusing on.

There are two general sources of errors:

1.  Your native language interferes with your target language

2.  You misuse a rule or word due to a lack of experience

These sources are, of course, very normal parts of learning a language.
In either case, you will probably eventually learn the correct form and
the error will become a mistake and then eventually disappear. When this
does not happen, this is known as fossilisation.

# Fossilisation


Fossilisation is the process in which the learner acquires a specific
form or way of speaking that is not native-like, and this error or
mistake becomes stuck in the learner’s speech. Fossilised errors and
mistakes are often resistant to correction and the learner’s efforts to
change.

Fossilised errors arise when a learner repeatedly (and successfully, in
terms of being understood) uses a certain form without being made aware
that it is not native-like. This happens to the point of hearing and
using it so often, it sounds natural and comes to mind easily.
Fossilised mistakes usually start off as fossilised errors, but remain
an unwelcome feature used habitually by the learner even after they are
made consciously aware it is incorrect.

The good news is that doing things to avoid fossilisation is also
generally good language learning technique. Here is how you can mitigate
the risk of developing fossilised errors and mistakes:

1.  Practice by learning the language in context. Use texts and videos
    over drills that isolate the language. (Principle: )

2.  Focus on listening and reading. Don’t feel like you have to start
    speaking early if you don’t feel comfortable.

3.  Try to be aware of how words and forms are used around you. Focus on
    shifting your speech to resemble more closely that of native
    speakers. (Principle: )

4.  Get feedback or correction. This can be done by a friend, tutor,
    family member, or language exchange partner. Make sure they
    understand that you would like your errors to be corrected. Most
    people will avoid correcting others’ speech to facilitate smooth
    conversation. (Principle: )



 [Prev](\assets\docs\languageguide\whattostudy\){: .btn .btn--primary .btn--x-large} | [Next](\assets\docs\languageguide\finalchapter\){: .btn .btn--primary .btn--x-large}
